--- Page 1 ---
Antioxidants may increase with acupressure stimulation 
 
 
 
J Altern Complement Med. 2008 Apr;14(3):303-7.  
Effect of auricular pellet acupressure on antioxidative systems in high-
risk diabetes mellitus. 
 
Liu CF, Yu LF, Lin CH, Lin SC. 
 
National Taipei College of Nursing, Taipei, Pei Tou 112, Taiwan. chifeng@ctcn.edu.tw 
 
OBJECTIVES: Free radicals and lipid peroxides, both of which are easily formed in the 
diabetic state, play an important role in the development of diabetic complications. 
Antioxidative therapy may help prevent diabetic complications caused by 
lipoperoxidation and free-radical formation in diabetes mellitus (DM). A number of 
findings suggest that oxidative stress exists in persons with high-risk DM. Auricular 
pellet acupressure has reportedly been an effective treatment method for a variety of 
medical conditions, including anxiety, juvenile myopia, essential hypertension, and 
senile vascular dementia. However, its effects on antioxidative enzymes have not been 
elucidated. We therefore evaluated the impact of auricular pellet acupressure on 
antioxidative status in persons with high-risk DM. SUBJECTS: Our study involved 69 
persons with high-risk DM, who were allocated either to undergo acupressure as active 
treatment for the experimental group or to a control group. INTERVENTIONS: The 
experimental group in the study received auricular pellet acupressure three times daily 
for 5 consecutive days. After a 2-day rest period, the procedure was performed on the 
contralateral ear. Acupressure was performed twice on each ear, with each application 
followed by its application to the contralateral ear, over a total treatment period of 20 
days. The control groups did not undergo auricular pellet acupressure. DESIGN AND 
OUTCOME MEASURES: At the end of the 20-day period of treatment of the 
experimental group, blood was collected from all of the study participants for assay of 
serum superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase concentrations, as was also done for 
the control group. RESULTS: Serum concentrations of SOD (p < 0.05) and catalase (p 
< 0.0001) were significantly higher in the experimental group than in the control group. 
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that auricular pellet acupressure can increase the 
concentration of antioxidative enzymes in persons with high-risk DM. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 2 ---
Anxiety reduction with acupressure and acupuncture on the same acupoint 
 
 
Anesth Analg. 2008 Sep;107(3):811-6. 
Extra-1 acupressure for children undergoing anesthesia. 
 
Wang SM, Escalera S, Lin EC, Maranets I, Kain ZN. 
 
Department of Anesthesiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA. shu-ming.wang@yale.edu 
 
BACKGROUND: Acupuncture and related techniques have been used as adjuncts for 
perioperative anesthesia management. We examined whether acupressure in the Extra-1 (Yin-
Tang) point would result in decreased preprocedural anxiety and reduced intraprocedural 
propofol requirements in a group of children undergoing endoscopic procedures. METHODS: 
Fifty-two children were randomized to receive acupressure bead intervention either at the Extra-
1 acupuncture point or at a sham point. A Bispectral Index (BIS) monitor was applied to all 
children before the onset of the intervention. Anxiety was assessed at baseline and before 
entrance to the operating room. Anesthetic techniques were standardized and maintained with IV 
propofol infusion titrated to keep BIS values of 40-60. RESULTS: We found that after the 
intervention, children in the Extra-1 group experienced reduced anxiety whereas children in the 
sham group experienced increased anxiety (-9% [-3 to -15] vs 2% [-6 to 7.4], P = 0.012). In 
contrast, no significant changes in BIS values were observed in the preprocedural waiting period 
between groups (P = ns). We also found that total intraprocedural propofol requirements did not 
differ between the two study groups (214 +/- 76 microg x kg(-1) x min(-1) vs 229 +/- 95 microg 
x kg(-1) x min(-1), P = 0.52). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that acupressure bead intervention 
at Extra-1 acupoint reduces preprocedural anxiety in children undergoing endoscopic 
procedures. This intervention, however, has no impact on BIS values or intraprocedural propofol 
requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---
Am J Chin Med. 2004;32(5):789-94. 
Needling of the extra 1 point decreases BIS values and preoperative anxiety. 
 
Paraskeva A, Melemeni A, Petropoulos G, Siafaka I, Fassoulaki A. 
 
Department of Anesthesiology, St Savas Hospital, Athens, Greece. 
 
Acupuncture has anxiolytic effects. We investigated the effect of acupuncture on the Bispectral 
Index (BIS) values and anxiety. Fifty patients were randomly assigned to group A to receive 
acupuncture for 15 minutes on the extra 1 point (yintang) or to group C, where they received the 
same treatment on a control point located 2 cm lateral to the end of the right eyebrow. BIS values 
were recorded before acupuncture; during acupuncture every 30 seconds for 15 minutes and 
every 30 seconds for 90 seconds when the acupuncture treatment was accomplished. Anxiety 
level was assessed before and after acupuncture by a verbal score scale (VSS) (0 = no anxiety, 10 
= worst anxiety). BIS values were significantly decreased during acupuncture when applied 
on the extra 1 point (p = 0.0001) but not on the control point. Acupuncture application 
significantly decreased the VSS values within the A group (p = 0.027) and in the C group (p = 
0.0001), when compared to the baseline (pre-acupuncture) VSS values. However, no differences 
were found between the two groups regarding BIS or VSS values. In conclusion, needling the 
extra 1 point preoperatively significantly decreases the BIS values and the VSS for anxiety but 
needling of a control point decrease only VSS values. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 4 ---
Brain wave EEG shows sedation produced by acupressure also acupressure 
can produce a calming effect on the autonomic nervous system as measured 
by HRV 
 
 
Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2004 Jan;21(1):13-9. 
 
Effects of acupressure, manual acupuncture and Laserneedle acupuncture on 
EEG bispectral index and spectral edge frequency in healthy volunteers. 
 
Litscher G. 
 
University of Graz, Department of Biomedical Engineering and Research in Anesthesia and 
Intensive Care, Graz, Austria. gerhard.litscher@uni-graz.at 
 
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The main purpose of this study was to investigate the 
effects of sensory (acupressure and acupuncture) and optical stimulation (Laserneedle 
acupuncture) on electroencephalographic bispectral index, spectral edge frequency and a verbal 
sedation score. METHODS: Twenty-five healthy volunteers (mean age +/- SD: 25.5 +/- 4.0yr) 
were investigated during the awake state. The acupuncture point Yintang and a placebo control 
point were stimulated. The study was performed as a randomized, controlled and partly blinded 
cross-over trial. RESULTS: Bispectral index and spectral edge frequency values both decreased 
significantly (P < 0.001) during acupressure on Yintang to values of 62.9 (minimum 35) +/- 13.9 
bispectral index and to 13.3 (minimum 2.9) +/- 8.1 Hz (spectral edge frequency right) and 13.8 
(minimum 2.7) +/- 7.3 Hz (spectral edge frequency left), respectively. Bispectral index was also 
significantly (P < 0.05) affected by Laserneedle acupuncture and acupressure on the control point 
but the changes were not clinically relevant, 95.4 +/- 4 and 94.2 +/- 4.8, respectively. All 
interventions significantly (Yintang: P < 0.001; control point: P < 0.012) reduced verbal sedation 
score. CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights the electroencephalographic similarities of 
acupressure induced sedation and general anaesthesia as assessed by bispectral index and 
spectral edge frequency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2008 Sep 30. [Epub ahead of print] 
The Influence of Acupressure at Extra 1 Acupuncture Point on the Spectral 
Entropy of the EEG and the LF/HF Ratio of Heart Rate Variability. 
 
Arai YC, Ushida T, Matsubara T, Shimo K, Ito H, Sato Y, Wakao Y, Komatsu T. 
 
Multidisciplinary Pain Centre, Aichi Medical University, School of Medicine, 21 Karimata, 
Nagakutecho, Aichigun, Aichi, 480-1195, Japan. arainon@aichi-med-u.ac.jp. 
 
Acupressure applied on the Extra 1 acupuncture point results in sedation, thereby reducing 
bispectral index (BIS) values. Mental status and hypnotic agents influence the autonomic 
nervous system. We hypothesized that acupressure at the Extra 1 point would induce sedation 
and change sympatho-parasympathetic nerve balance. We investigated the effect of 
acupressure at the Extra 1 point on the EEG spectral entropy values and heart rate variability 
(HRV). Forty-eight volunteers (24 males and 24 females) were randomly assigned to the control 
or Extra 1 group. The control group received acupressure at a sham point and the Extra 1 group 
received acupressure at the Extra 1 point. Acupressure was applied for 5 min. The record of the 
EEG spectral entropy values and HRV started 5 min before acupressure and stopped 5 min after 
acupressure. Acupressure significantly reduced the EEG spectral entropy values in both groups, 
but the values of the Extra 1 group were significantly smaller than those of the control group (P < 
0.01). Acupressure significantly decreased the LF/HF ratio of HRV in both groups (P < 0.05). 
When divided upon gender, although acupressure tended to decrease the LF/HF ratio, the ratio 
significantly decreased during and after acupressure only in females of the Extra 1 group (P < 
0.05). We concluded that acupressure on the Extra 1 point significantly reduced the EEG spectral 
entropy in both the genders, but affected the LF/HF ratio of HRV only in females. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 6 ---
Anesth Analg. 2008 Aug;107(2):661-4. 
The effect of acupressure at the extra 1 point on subjective and autonomic 
responses to needle insertion. 
 
Arai YC, Ushida T, Osuga T, Matsubara T, Oshima K, Kawaguchi K, Kuwabara C, Nakao 
S, Hara A, Furuta C, Aida E, Ra S, Takagi Y, Watakabe K. 
 
Multidisciplinary Pain Center, Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Nagakutecho, Aichigun, 
Aichi 480-1195, Japan. arainon@aichi-med-u.ac.jp 
 
BACKGROUND: Premedication with sedatives can decrease the discomfort associated with 
invasive anesthetic procedures. Some researchers have shown that acupressure on the 
acupuncture extra 1 point is effective for sedation. We investigated whether acupressure on 
the extra 1 point could alleviate the pain of needle insertion. METHODS: We investigated the 
effect of acupressure at the extra 1 point or a sham point on needle insertion using verbal rating 
scale (VRS) pain scores and heart rate variability (HRV). Twenty-two healthy female volunteers 
were randomly allocated to two groups: the extra 1 group received acupressure at the extra 1 
point, and the sham group received acupressure at a sham point. After starting the 
electrocardiogram record, a 27-gauge needle was inserted into the skin of a forearm. Thereafter, 
another needle was inserted into the skin of the other forearm during acupressure. RESULTS: 
Acupressure at the extra 1 point significantly reduced the VRS, but acupressure at the sham 
increased the VRS. Acupressure at the extra 1 significantly reduced the low frequency/high 
frequency ratio of HRV responding to needle insertion. CONCLUSIONS: Acupressure at the 
extra 1 point significantly reduced needle insertion pain compared with acupressure at the sham 
point. Also, acupressure at the extra 1 point significantly reduced the low frequency/high 
frequency ratio of HRV responding to needle insertion, which implies a reduction in 
sympathetic nervous system activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 7 ---
Both acupressure and acupuncture improve energy and reduce fatigue in 
cancer patients after chemotherapy 
 
 
 
Complement Ther Med. 2007 Dec;15(4):228-37. Epub 2006 Nov 13. 
The management of cancer-related fatigue after chemotherapy with acupuncture 
and acupressure: a randomised controlled trial. 
 
Molassiotis A, Sylt P, Diggins H. 
 
University of Manchester, School of Nursing, Midwifery & Social Work, Coupland III, 
Coupland Street, Manchester M13 9PL, UK. alex.molassiotis@manchester.ac.uk 
 
BACKGROUND: Cancer-related fatigue after chemotherapy is a difficult symptom to manage in 
practice and the most disruptive symptom in patients' lives. Acupuncture is a popular 
complementary therapy among cancer patients and some evidence exists that it could potentially 
alleviate fatigue by stimulating 'energy' points in the body. Hence, this study was carried out to 
assess the effects of acupuncture and acupressure in managing cancer-related fatigue and the 
feasibility of running a randomised trial with these two complementary therapies in preparation 
for a large trial. METHODS: This study was a randomised controlled trial. Forty-seven patients 
with cancer who experienced moderate to severe fatigue were randomised either to an 
acupuncture group (n=15), an acupressure group (n=16) or a sham acupressure group (n=16). 
The acupuncture group received six 20-min sessions over 2 weeks, while the patients in the two 
acupressure groups were taught to massage/press the points and did so daily thereafter for 2 
weeks on their own. Patients completed the Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory before 
randomisation, at the end of the 2-week intervention and again about 2 weeks after the end of the 
intervention. RESULTS: Significant improvements were found with regards to General fatigue 
(P<0.001), Physical fatigue (P=0.016), Activity (p=0.004) and Motivation (P=0.024). At the end 
of the intervention, there was a 36% improvement in fatigue levels in the acupuncture group, 
while the acupressure group improved by 19% and the sham acupressure by 0.6%. 
Improvements were observed even 2 weeks after treatments, although they were lower (22%, 
15%, 7%, respectively). Acupuncture was a more effective method than acupressure or sham 
acupressure. Subjects needed a longer treatment period to have more sustained results. The trial 
was methodologically feasible. CONCLUSION: Acupuncture shows great potential in the 
management of cancer-related fatigue. As a randomised trial with acupuncture is feasible and 
preliminary data shows significant improvements, it should be tested further using a large sample 
and a multicentre design. 
 
 
 


--- Page 8 ---
Antioxidant levels may increase with acupuncture stimulation or be 
maintained during stress  
 
J Tradit Chin Med. 2002 Mar;22(1):51-4. 
Effect of acupuncture on free radicals in rats with early experimental spinal cord 
injury. 
 
Wu Y, Sun Z, Li Z, Zhao Y, Sun S. 
 
Second Affiliated Hospital, Heilongjiang University of Traditional Chinese Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Harbin 150001. 
 
Effect of acupuncture on free radicals after spinal cord injury was observed in rats with 
experimental spinal cord injury (SCI). Results indicated that within 24 hours after SCI 
malondialdehyde (MDA) increased progressively, 2 hours after SCI it reached the peak; and the 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity decreased significantly at the same hours, the decrease 
being the most marked 2-6 hours after SCI. The MDA content in the acupuncture group was 
significantly lower (P < 0.05) and the SOD activity higher (P < 0.01) than that of the control 
group respectively. It is suggested that acupuncture inhibits production of MDA and increases 
the SOD activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 9 ---
Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2006 Apr;26(4):291-4. 
[Effects of scalp acupuncture on regulative ability of oxidative stress reaction at 
operation stage] 
 
[Article in Chinese] 
 
He BM, Li WY, Li WS, Zhao WX. 
 
Guangdong Provincial Hospital of TCM, Guangzhou 510120, China. hebimei02@163.com 
 
OBJECTIVE: To study on regulative action of scalp acupuncture on oxidative stress reaction at 
operation stage. METHODS: Fifty two cases selected for radical operation of intestinal cancer 
were randomly divided into a scalp acupuncture plus general anesthesia (scalp acupuncture 
group) and a simple general anesthesia group (general anesthesia group), 26 cases in each group. 
The scalp acupuncture group were treated first with scalp acupuncture for 20 min, followed by 
general anesthesia, with scalp acupuncture lasted till the end of operation. The general anesthesia 
group were treated only with simple intratracheal anesthesia. Effects of scalp acupuncture on 
malondialdehyde (MDA) level and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity at the operation stage 
were observed. RESULTS: After operation, MDA levels decreased significantly (P < 0.05) in the 
two groups, but with no difference between the two groups in the different values of MDA 
before and after treatment (P > 0.05); there was no significant change in SOD before and after 
treatment in the scalp acupuncture group, and significantly decreased in the general anesthesia 
group (P < 0.05). There was a significant difference between the two groups in the different 
value of SOD before and after the operation (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Scalp acupuncture 
can inhibit the decrease of SOD activity, reducing oxidative stress reaction at operation 
stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 10 ---
Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2006 Apr;26(4):240-2. 
[Effects of head point-through-point electroacupuncture on SOD and LPO in the 
patient of Parkinson's disease] 
 
[Article in Chinese] 
 
Wang S, Cai YY, Shang YJ, Jin-rong L. 
 
Heilongjiang Province Academy of TCM, Harbin 150036, China. hljwang@yahoo.com.cn 
 
OBJECTIVE: To observe clinical therapeutic effect of head point-through-point 
electroacupuncture on Parkinson's disease and the mechanism. METHODS: Seventy-six cases of 
Parkinson's disease were randomly divided into a treatment group (n=37) treated with head 
point-through-point electroacupuncture and oral administration of madopa, and a control group 
(n=39) with only oral administration of madopa. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) and lipids 
peroxides (LPO) were determined before and after treatment. RESULTS: The effective rate was 
97.3% in the treatment group and 61.5% in the control group with a very significant difference 
between the two groups (P < 0.01). SOD activity and LPO content were significantly improved 
after treatment in the treatment group (P < 0.01), with a significant difference between the two 
groups (P < 0.01). CONCLUSION: Head point-through-point electroacupuncture can 
improve SOD activity and LPO content in the body. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 11 ---
Neurosci Lett. 2006 Jan 23;393(1):45-50. Epub 2005 Oct 19. 
Acupuncture prevents cognitive deficits and oxidative stress in cerebral multi-
infarction rats. 
 
Liu CZ, Yu JC, Zhang XZ, Fu WW, Wang T, Han JX. 
 
Gerontological Department, The First Hospital affiliated to Tianjin College of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, 314 West Anshan Avenue, China. lcz623780@eyou.com 
 
The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of acupuncture on cognitive deficits and 
oxidative stress in cerebral multi-infarction rats. The results showed that acupunctural treatment 
attenuated memory impairment induced by cerebral multi-infarction, as evaluated by shortened 
escape latency and increased swimming time of rats with memory impairment in the target 
quadrant. The data additionally suggested that acupunctural treatment ameliorated oxidative 
injuries induced by cerebral multi-infarction by increasing the activities of superoxide dismutase 
(SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) in the hippocampus. Further investigation by in situ 
hybridization and immunohistochemistry revealed that acupunctural treatment significantly 
increased the expression of CuZnSOD mRNA and protein in the hippocampus of the impaired 
rats. The findings demonstrate that acupuncture can exert beneficial effects on spatial 
memory and antioxidant status of cerebral multi-infarction rats. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 12 ---
Bull Exp Biol Med. 2004 Jul;138(1):26-9. 
 
Antioxidant status of erythrocytes after acupuncture treatment. 
 
Pogosyan AS, Venediktova NI, Kosenko EA, Kaminskii YG. 
 
Hospital of Pushchino Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino. 
 
A course of acupuncture therapy in patients with locomotor, peripheral nervous system, 
gynecological, and bronchopulmonary diseases led to complete or partial normalization of 
nonspecifically changed MDA content, catalase and glutathione peroxidase activities in 
erythrocytes. SOD activity increased after therapy and did not differ from the control. 
Acupuncture stabilized disordered LPO processes and improved the antioxidant status of 
erythrocytes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 13 ---
Acupuncture has a relaxing effect and may help insomnia 
 
 
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2004 Winter;16(1):19-28. 
Acupuncture increases nocturnal melatonin secretion and reduces insomnia and 
anxiety: a preliminary report. 
 
Spence DW, Kayumov L, Chen A Lowe A
, 
, Jain U, Katzman MA, Shen J, Perelman B, 
Shapiro CM. 
 
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
 
The response to acupuncture of 18 anxious adult subjects who complained of insomnia was 
assessed in an open prepost clinical trial study. Five weeks of acupuncture treatment was 
associated with a significant (p = 0.002) nocturnal increase in endogenous melatonin secretion 
(as measured in urine) and significant improvements in polysomnographic measures of sleep 
onset latency (p = 0.003), arousal index (p = 0.001), total sleep time (p = 0.001), and sleep 
efficiency (p = 0.002). Significant reductions in state (p = 0.049) and trait (p = 0.004) anxiety 
scores were also found. These objective findings are consistent with clinical reports of 
acupuncture's relaxant effects. Acupuncture treatment may be of value for some categories 
of anxious patients with insomnia. 


