--- Page 1 ---
Dr. Dean Clark 
6105 S.W. Macadam Ave. 
Portland, Oregon 97239 
Phone: 503-244-3389 
Fax: 503-244-4855 
Email: drdeanclark@comcast.net 
 
 
July 6, 2006 
 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
Please be advised that I have tested and measured over 200 people in the course of  
studying the effects of the Lifewave products.  I have relied on surveys of the people 
studied before and after application of the patches. I then measured the physiological 
response with infrared imaging.  In all cases thus far, there has been an undeniable 
physiological response through the autonomic nervous system creating a localized 
thermal change to the subjects and ultimately an overall body thermal change as 
measured in distal parts of the body remote from the area of application. 
 
In the first study of the energy patches, the results were greater than 85 percent of the 
people that used the products received a significant measurable difference in 
physiological responses such as sleep differences, bowel function and overall energy. 
 
In all cases that I have studied so far the patches have created a measurable change to 
the body when measured by infrared studies. Although the body has responded with a 
cooling effect, there is a small percentage that had an area of hypothermic change and 
ultimately warmed in the localized region. What has always created curiosity in the 
subjects studied was the whole body effects that were brought on by the application of 
the patches in general, the body just worked more efficiently, rested better and had 
better strength and endurance. 
 
The side-effects and safety of the patches is also a significant aspect when offering 
these to my patients. Since I treat and prepare world class and professional athletes for 
competition, it is imperative that the products are safe and beyond any and all drug and 
substance standards. To satisfy the rigorous drug testing standards and safety, of 
International Olympic Committee I had to be sure the products were beyond reproach.  
The only occasional side-effects have been temporary fatigue and sleepiness. There 
have been a few cases that have noted a detoxification to the body which caused an 
unusual thirst. Besides these reactions, I have found no other abnormal responses by 
the participants in the studies as well as those who purchased the products and used 
them outside of the studies. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Dr. Dean Clark, D.C. 


